# How to Make a Single Product Page in Merchello

## Introduction

In this example, we will create a new Umbraco 7.x website using the txt starter kit, install the Merchello 1.4 package, then create an Umbraco content page that contains a single Merchello product. This is a lightly technical example.

The Umbraco version is 7.1.5 and the Merchello version is 1.4.

## Installation

### Install Umbraco

Download Umbraco 7.1.6 (UmbracoCms.7.1.6.zip) from [http://our.umbraco.org/contribute/releases/716](http://our.umbraco.org/contribute/releases/716). Expand the zip file. Open IIS Manager and add a new website called MerchelloSinglePageExample. Create a new .Net v4.0 application pool for the website. Make sure the website started.

In your host file, add a hostname as MerchelloSinglePageExample which stands for Umbraco Starter kit Merchello Clean install.

>127.0.0.1MerchelloSinglePageExample

Save the host file and open a browser to [http://MerchelloSinglePageExample](http://MerchelloSinglePageExample). When the web page comes up, the "Install Umbraco 7" box will show.


!(umbraco-begin-install.png)

Enter the name, email, and password. I'll use admin, [admin@admin.com](mailto:admin@admin.com), and 1234.

Press the **install** button. When the web-based installation of Umbraco is done, you will see the black login screen.

!(umbraco-logon.png)

Open a second tab in the browser to view the live content. Make sure the txt starter kit is loaded at http://MerchelloSinglePageExample/. Keep this second tab open. We will move between the Umbraco backend and the content frontend to verify results later in this example.

!(umbraco-text-starter.png)

### Install Merchello

The next step is to get Merchello. Download Merchello from [http://our.umbraco.org/projects/collaboration/merchello](http://our.umbraco.org/projects/collaboration/merchello). For this sample, I downloaded Merchello 1.4.0. The file name is Merchello\_1.4.0.zip. Don't expand the zip file.

The second step is to logon to the Umbraco backend and go to the Developer section. In the Developer/Packages section, select **Install local package** .

!(umbraco-backend-install-package.png)

Open a second tab in the browser to view the live content. Make sure the txt starter kit is loaded at http://MerchelloSinglePageExample/. Keep this second tab open. We will move between the Umbraco backend and the content frontend to verify results later in this example.

!(umbraco-package-installed-successfully.png)

Click the **Accept License** check box and select **Install Package** for the Merchello file you just downloaded.

!(umbraco-merchello-icon.png)

When the installation is done, you will see the Package is Installed screen.

!(merchello-icon.png)

Notice on the left-side black bar, there is now a Merchello icon toward the bottom.

!(merchello-settings.png)

Umbraco and Merchello are now successfully installed. We can move on to configure Umbraco and Merchello.

## Configuration

Merchello configuration is done in the Umbraco backend Merchello section. You can control the product catalog, inventory, shipping, payment, taxation, and notifications.

### Configure Merchello Global Product Properties

Merchello configuration includes some general settings for the product catalog such as currency, date format, and taxability.

Before we begin configuring Merchello for this specific example, we should set a few global properties for Merchello products. This will save time by NOT having to set the properties for each product as it is added to the catalog.

Go to Merchello/Settings. Select any property that applies to MOST of your products:

- All items are taxable
- All items are shippable
- Track Inventory for all items and variants
- Shipping charges are taxable

!(merchello-create-product.png)

You also have more configuration choices inside of the shipping, taxation, payment, notification, and gateway provider categories. This example won't change any of those settings.

### Add 1 Product to Merchello Product Catalog

The next step is to add a product to the Merchello Product catalog. Since this is a simple example and we only need one product, the product information will be simple.

In the Merchello/Catalog section, create a new product called Boots, with a price of 10, and a base sku of BootsSku. These are the required properties on a product. Save the product.

!(umbraco-merchello-product-catalog.png)

Save the product then select the catalog again and see it now has one product.

!(umbraco-datatypes-merchello-product-selector.png)


It is important to note that you probably have a lot more information about your products that you want to keep in the system. Merchello holds the merchandising information needed for shipping and fulfillment only. All descriptive information (including images) is kept in Umbraco in the Content section. Alternatively, you can pull that information in from another source via APIs in the code pages.

### Merchello Data Types

The next step of the Merchello example is to connect the Merchello data type in the Developer/Data Types section so it can be used in an Umbraco/Settings/Document Type as a property. Merchello has 2 properties: product selector and product editor. This example will only use the product selector.

#### Add Product Selector Data Type

In the Umbraco/Settings/Data Types, create a new Data Type called Merchello Product Selector. Choose the Merchello Product Selector as the Property editor. Umbraco will create the alias of Merchello.ProductSelector. Save the Data Type.

!(umbraco-doctypes-copy.png)

### Configure Umbraco to work with Merchello Products

Since Merchello is an API, it can be used in many ways. This example will show a simple, easy method that would be suitable for designers and junior developers. This example should feel very familiar to Umbraco users and is meant to keep the product information in the Umbraco content system. In this example, Merchello connects to Umbraco by setting a single product on a single content page.

#### Create a Document Type for the Product Page

We will create a new document type for the product by copying the Text Page document type.

Go to the Umbraco/Settings/Document Types. Expand the tree.

Since this example's Umbraco install included the txt starter kit, the document types should include a root called Master along with several items under Master. This starter kit uses the text page heavily, so select the text page and copy it. Name the new page Merch1Product, meaning a merchandise page containing a single product.

!(umbraco-doctypes-newtab.png)

For now, ignore the text template. We will fix that up after we are done with the merchandise properties.

##### Create Merchadise tab

Select that Document Type (named Merch1Product) and add a tab called Merchandise Properties. This is only to keep the new properties of this example separated from the properties already contained in the Text Document Type.

!(umbraco-doctypes-add-new-property-merchello-product-selector.png)

##### Add Product property of type _Merchello Product Selector_

Once the tab is created, go to Generic properties. Add a new property called Product as a Merchello Product Selector and select the Merchandise Properties tab. Save the property. This is pulled from Merchello.

!(umbraco-doctypes-add-new-property-product-description-text.png)

##### Add ProductDescription property of type _textstring_

Add a second property called ProductDescription as a textstring and select the Merchandise Properties tab. Save the property. This is pulled from Umbraco.

!(umbraco-doctypes-review-properties.png)

##### Review Document Type Properties 

A Content page whose document type is Merch1Product will have 1 property from Merchello (the product) and 1 property from Umbraco (the description).

!(umbraco-edit-template.png)

#### Create new Template to display single Product

In Developer/Settings/Templates, select Create to create a new template. Name the template Merch1Product. A simple, empty template will be created.

!(umbraco-doctype-change-default-template.png)

##### Change Document Type's Template

Now that we have a template for the single product page, we need to fix the document type to use it.

Go back to the Developer/Settings/Document Types and select the Merch1Product Document Type. Change the default template and the allowed templates from Text Page to Merch1Product. Save the Document Type.

###Add Merchello Library to Template via @using Statement
The product template doesn't display anything yet. First we will add the Merchello Library and some simple HTML to check that the Merchello library is installed correctly. Then we will add the two properties to the template. 

Go back to the Developer/Settings/Templates section and select the product template. Change the template so it pulls in the Merchello library via a using statement, and add some HTML to display. Save the template.

    @inherits Umbraco.Web.Mvc.UmbracoTemplatePage
    @using Umbraco.Core
    @using Merchello.Web
    @{
      Layout = null;
    }


###Product Page

!(umbraco-edit-template-add-merchello-web.png)

#### Create Content Page

Before we bring in the Merchello or Umbraco properties from the Doc Type, let's make sure the page works. Go to Content and create a new content page with the Doc Type of Merch1Product. Name the content page ExampleProduct. Do not set any other properties.

##### Verify Web Page is working

View the content page in the browser at http://merchellosinglepageexample/exampleproduct

!(browser-product-page-empty.png)

If you see the web page with the simple text, Merchello has successfully been loaded onto the page. If you see an error page, review the steps.

#### Modify Template to Pull in Merchello and Umbraco properties in Doc Type

Now that the basic content page works, let's modify the template to show the page properties.

In the Settings/Templates section, modify the page to include the product name and product description as shown below and save the template.

    @inherits Umbraco.Web.Mvc.UmbracoTemplatePage
    @using Umbraco.Core
    @using Merchello.Web
    @{
      Layout = null;
    }

    Example Product

	@{
	
	  // Get Mechello - this is NOT the only way to get access to Merchello
	  // For a quick and simple example, this is the most straight forward
	  var helper = newMerchelloHelper();
	
	  // Merchello product guid tied to the Umbraco content page
	  // set via the Merchello Product Selector
	  var key = newGuid(CurrentPage.product);
	
	  // Merchello product
	  var product = helper.Query.Product.GetByKey(key);
	
	}

	<!--
		Umbraco Content Page Id: @CurrentPage.id, 
	Merchello Product Guid: @key.ToString()
	-->
	<!-- exampletable class is only for center alignment -->
	<table class="exampletable">
		<tr>
			<td>		
				Item 
			</td>
			<td>
				Item Value
			</td>
			<td>
				Storage   
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>		
				Product: 
			</td>
			<td>
				@product.Name
			</td>
			<td>
				Merchello Product Catalog 
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>		
				Description: 
			</td>
			<td>
				@Model.Content.GetPropertyValue("productdescription")
			</td>
			<td>
				Umbraco Content Page
			</td>
		</tr>
	</table>




#### On the Content page, Select Content Merchandise Properties
Now that the template will show the product information, let's go set the content information in the content page.

In the Umbraco backend tab, on the ExampleProduct content page, go to the Merchandise Properties tab. Press the **Select Product** button.

!(umbraco-content-product-selector.png)

##### Select the Merchello Product
Select the only product in the catalog from the far-right panel. You may have to scroll to the right in the far-right panel to see the select button.

!(umbraco-content-product-selector-flyin.png)

The Merchandise Properties should now show that product.

!(umbraco-content-product-selected.png)

##### Enter the Product Description field
Fill in the product description with "The product is available for you today. Fast ship, reliable product." Save and Publish the page.

##### Verify Web Page is working
The web page should now be available at [http://merchellosinglepageexample/exampleproduct/](http://merchellosinglepageexample/exampleproduct/) and should contain all the style of the txt starter kit as well as the text strings of Product and Description. This verifies that the page has access to the Merchello product information as well as the content information.

!(browser-product-page-not-empty.png)

If your example doesn't work at this point, go back to review the steps.

#### [Advanced] Add More Properties in Visual Studio

Now that you are comfortable adding Merchello properties in the Umbraco template, let's use Microsoft Visual Studio's Intellisense to discover other available properties.

Open Visual Studio 2012 or 2013 and open the Umbraco website. In the Solution Explorer, expand the Views folder and select the Merch1Product.cshtml file.

!(visual-studio-solution-explorer-views.png)

In the Merch1Product.cshtml file, add another row to the html table. The first  should be called Price, and the third column should be named Merchello Product Catalog. In the second column, enter "@product." and look at the Intellisense. All the product properties are available.

!(visual-studio-codepage-intellisense-propertylist.png)

Select the Price property, convert it to a string and format with a "C" for currency:

!(visual-studio-razor.png)

Save the file and move back to the web browser tab to see the live content page displaying the product information, including the price and currency.

!(browser-product-page.png)

In Visual Studio, add more properties from the Merchello Product Catalog:

| Merchello Property| Asp.Net Property |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------- | 
| Sale Price                | @product.SalePrice.ToString("C") |
| Manufactuer               | @product.Manufacturer            |
| Manufacturer Model Number | @product.ManufacturerModelNumber |
| IsTaxable                 | @product.Taxable                 |
| InStock                   | @product.Available               |


Save the file and refresh live content page.

!(browser-product-page-other-properties.png)

## Example Website Available for Download

For your convenience, [you can download a zip file containing this entire example completed](MerchelloSingleProductPageExample.zip).

## Summary

In this example, we created a new Umbraco 7.x website using the txt starter kit, installed the Merchello 1.4 package, then created an Umbraco content page that contains a single Merchello product.

Now that you have the Umbraco template connected to the Merchello product catalog, you can add your products and create product content pages.
